argus v1.7.0 — the front door
=============================

Released: (unreleased)
Commit:   (see git log)
Authors:  Antonio Giordano

STATUS: MINOR — additive. Nothing existing changed behaviour; every one of the
ten older entry points works exactly as it did.


WHY
---

Argus had about ten entry points and every one of them was named after a
mechanism: New+Watch, UniversalConfigWatcher, ...WithConfig,
GenericConfigWatcher, SimpleFileWatcher, WatchDirectory, WatchDirectoryMerged,
WatchRemoteConfig, NewConfigManager, LoadConfigMultiSource. An application had
to know which machine it wanted before it could say what it needed.

This release adds one entry point named after the job, and the README now
advertises that one alone. The others stay, documented in the API reference.


ADDED
-----

1. argus.Setup — the one advertised entry point.

     settings, err := argus.Setup("agent").
         File("config.json").
         Env("AGENT_").
         Documents("prompts", "prompts/*.md").
         Start()
     defer settings.Close()

   Setup returns a builder; Start returns *argus.Settings, a handle on one
   revision of the configuration. Sources merge in a fixed order that cannot
   be reordered:

     overrides > flags > environment > files/directories > remote > defaults

   The local file sits above the remote deliberately: it is the emergency
   override when the remote is unreachable or wrong.

   File insists that the file is there; FileIfPresent does not, which is the
   "/etc/myapp.json if somebody put one there" case that otherwise made every
   application stat the path itself. Absent is not an error; present and
   unparseable still is, because a file somebody wrote and got wrong is not
   the same as a file nobody wrote.

   Two holes the old doors had are closed here. The environment is a
   first-class source: ConfigManager only reached a variable through a
   *declared flag*, with the prefix forced to the application name, so an
   application with no flags saw no environment at all. And no path in this
   API calls os.Exit, so Argus can be embedded in somebody else's library.

2. Documents — configuration that is text.

   Everything else in Argus assumes a file parses into a map. A system prompt
   in prompts/system.md or a skill in skills/summarize.md had no path through
   the library.

     .Documents("prompts", "prompts/*.md")
     .RequiredDocuments("skills", "skills/**/*.md")

     doc, ok := settings.Doc("prompts", "system")
     doc.String()   // the content
     doc.Hash       // SHA-256, what the audit trail records

   Read, never parsed: .md does not reach DetectFormat or ParseConfig, so the
   attack surface of a parser is absent because there is no parser. Documents
   live in their own namespace, addressed as (group, name), and cannot collide
   with keys.

   Caps: 1 MB per document, 16 MB in total, 1000 documents. An oversized
   *optional* document is skipped and reported; a *required* one that is
   missing or unreadable refuses the whole load.

3. Revisions, and a validated swap.

   Everything readable at an instant belongs to one revision. A reload builds
   a candidate, validates it, and swaps it in atomically. A candidate that
   does not hold together is dropped whole: the current revision stays, the
   error handler is told, the audit records the refusal, and the next cycle
   tries again. Somebody saving a broken YAML over a running service no longer
   takes its configuration away.

   Five files saved together are one revision, not five. A cycle stats the
   declared paths first and builds only when something moved.

4. Typed binding, with a new value per revision.

     type Config struct {
         Model   string        `argus:"model,required"`
         Timeout time.Duration `argus:"timeout"`
         Server  struct {
             Port int `argus:"port"`
         } `argus:"server"`
     }

     bound, err := argus.Bind[Config](settings)
     cfg := bound.Value()

   Every revision produces a new value, and Value returns the one in force.
   Argus never writes into a struct the application is already reading: that
   is a data race inside user code, and no locking on this side removes it.

   From the moment a type is bound, a revision that does not satisfy it is
   refused — a required key that goes missing keeps the last good value
   serving rather than zeroing a field.

   The field plan is worked out once, from the type. Reading is an atomic load
   at 0.5 ns and no allocation; building a value costs about 900 ns, once per
   revision.

   ConfigBinder is unchanged and still binds package-level variables with no
   reflection at all.

5. Change and Explain.

   OnReload receives what moved by name: Change.Keys (dotted, e.g.
   "server.port") and Change.Documents. Never the values — a prompt cannot
   travel into a log line through a callback argument.

   Explain() returns a struct, not a string, so it marshals as JSON for a
   debug endpoint: the revision in force, which source supplied each key, the
   state of every source (loaded, failed, absent), how many documents and how
   many bytes, and what Setup chose to watch the filesystem with.

6. The remote has its own clock.

   RemoteInterval, 30 seconds by default, says how often the provider is read
   again. A local file save rebuilds the revision without calling the network,
   and a provider that stops answering keeps serving what it last gave —
   losing a key over a network blip would be worse than serving it a little
   stale. Explain reports that source as "stale" rather than "failed", which
   are different things to whoever is reading it.

7. Revision digest: the content identity of a configuration.

     settings.Digest()        // "3f9c..."
     settings.Explain().Digest

   Revision is a counter, and a counter is local to one process: two instances
   running the same configuration have unrelated numbers, and a restart puts
   the count back to one. The digest is a hash of what the revision holds —
   every key a layer names, resolved through the whole precedence, and every
   document by hash — so that "this run used configuration 3f9c" means the
   same thing on another machine and after a restart.

   It ignores which source supplied a value: the same port from a file and
   from an environment variable is the same configuration. Values are compared
   as they render, so two spellings of one number are two values, and a key
   that exists only in the environment, named by no other layer, cannot be
   enumerated and is not part of it.

   Every audit record of a revision carries it.

8. Explain reports a refused candidate.

   A candidate that does not hold together never becomes a revision, so until
   now its error existed only if the application had an OnError handler. An
   instance could be serving configuration that no longer matched the disk and
   have no way to say so.

     settings.Explain().LastRefusal   // reason, when, consecutive cycles,
                                      // and the revision still in force

   State rather than a side effect: no default logger appears, no database is
   created, and silence is no longer possible for anybody who looks.

9. Audit of configuration changes.

   Audit() records to the unified trail, AuditTo(logger) to one the
   application already owns. Each swap records the revision and what changed
   by name and hash; a refusal records the reason. The system prompt never
   reaches the audit database. A logger Argus opened is closed by Close; one
   the application supplied is only flushed.


NOT IN THIS RELEASE
-------------------

The writer stays where it is: editing configuration is the CLI's job.

The builder has no .Poll() or .Notify(): Setup chooses the backend and Explain
reports it. That is what lets fsnotify arrive as pure addition.


ALSO
----

Binding is strict where the getters are lenient. GetInt on a value that is not
a number returns zero, by a contract older than this release; a bound field
refuses, naming the field, the key and the value. A port written as "eihgt
thousand" is a mistake somebody made, not a zero.

A revision that fails to build is reported once, not at every poll. A file
that stays broken has nothing new to say until it changes.

Entries a configuration directory cannot use — a symlink resolving outside it,
a pipe, something unreadable — are reported through Explain, as skipped
documents already were.

Source marshals as its name. Explain is meant to be logged or served on a
debug endpoint, and "source": 4 tells the operator reading it nothing;
"source": "file" does. It reads back too, and an unknown name is an error
rather than a silent SourceNone.

A revision is spent only when something changed. The cycle used to publish
whenever the fingerprint moved, so touching a file — or kubelet remounting a
ConfigMap, which moves every timestamp under ..data — advanced the revision of
an application whose configuration was exactly what it had been.


SECURITY
--------

The document store takes paths and file contents from outside the process, so
it is tested as a hostile surface:

  - a symlink resolving outside the documents directory is skipped, while one
    resolving inside is followed — a Kubernetes ConfigMap mount is a directory
    of symlinks into ..data, and refusing symlinks outright would make Argus
    useless there
  - a symlink loop is skipped rather than followed
  - a FIFO, device or socket is skipped: os.ReadFile on a named pipe blocks
    until somebody writes, which would hang the reload for ever. The store
    stats before it opens
  - a file rewritten while it is being read is discarded and retried next
    cycle (stat, read, stat), so half a saved prompt never reaches the
    application
  - a required document that is unreadable by permissions refuses the load
  - two files that would map to the same name refuse the load rather than let
    directory order decide

The same two guards — stat before open, and containment after resolving
symlinks — are applied to configuration directories and to the explicit
configuration file, which is where they were missing: a FIFO dropped into a
configuration directory hung the reload for ever, and a symlink out of one was
merged into the configuration.

Three fuzz targets are new: envKeyName (a key must never read a variable
outside its prefix), document name derivation, and glob patterns. They found
three real defects before release — a dotfile resolving to an empty name, a
file named "..." resolving to "..", and a recursive pattern rooted at / that
walked the working directory instead.


MEASURED
--------

A quiet cycle — the stat pass that runs at every poll and finds nothing
changed, including the directory scan:

    10 documents      36.8 us     (3.7 us per file)
   100 documents     246 us       (2.5 us per file)
  1000 documents       2.55 ms    (2.5 us per file)

At the default one-second budget, a thousand documents cost about 0.25% of a
core to watch. At 200 ms, about 1.3%.

Reads from the handle:

  GetString, flat key        29.8 ns    0 allocs
  GetString, nested key     196.5 ns    1 alloc   (the dotted path is split)
  Doc                         8.7 ns    0 allocs

Measured on an 8-core Linux box, Go 1.25.9, with benchmarks now in the repo
(settings_bench_test.go).


QUALITY GATES
-------------

  gofmt -l .              PASS (clean)
  go vet ./...            PASS
  staticcheck ./...       PASS (0 issues)
  gosec -conf .gosec.json PASS (0 issues)
  go test ./...           PASS
  go test -race ./...     PASS
